XI.
CONSCIENCE RACKS TOM.
Close upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified with the ghastly
news. No need of the as yet undreamed of telegraph. The tale flew from man to man, from group
to group, from house to house, with little less than telegraphic speed. Of course, the
schoolmaster gave holiday for that afternoon. The town would have thought strangely of him
if he had not. A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been
recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter. So the story ran. And it was said
that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing himself in the branch, about one or
two o'clock in the morning, and that Potter had at once sneaked off. Suspicious circumstances,
especially the washing, which was not a habit with Potter. It was also said that the town
had been ransacked for this murderer—the public are not slow in the matter of sifting
evidence and arriving at a verdict—but that he could not be found. Horsemen had departed
all the roads in every direction, and the sheriff was confident that he would be captured
before night. All the town was drifting toward the graveyard. Tom's heartbreak vanished,
and he joined the procession, not because he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere
else, but because an awful unaccountable fascination drew him on. Arrived at the dreadful place,
he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle. It seemed to
him an age since he was there before. Somebody pinched his arm. He turned, and his eyes met
huckleberries. Then both looked elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed
anything in their mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent upon the grisly spectacle
before them.
"'Poor fellow! Poor young fellow! This ought to be a lesson to grave robbers. Muff Potter
will hang for this if they catch him.' This was the drift of remark, and the minister
said, "'It was a judgment. His hand is here.'"
Now Tom shivered from head to heel, for his eye fell upon the stolid face of Injun Joe.
At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle, and voices shouted,
"'It's him! It's him! He's coming himself! Who? Who?" from twenty voices.
"'Muff Potter!'
"'Hullo! He's stopped. Look out! He's turning. Don't let him get away!' People in the branches
of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't trying to get away. He only looked doubtful
and perplexed.
"'Infernal impudence!' said a bystander. Wanted to come and take a quiet look at his
work. I reckon. Didn't expect any company.' The crowd fell apart now, and the sheriff
came through, ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was haggard,
and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood before the murdered man
he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears.
"'I didn't do it, friends!' he sobbed. "'Pon my word! An honour! I never done it!'
"'Whose accused you?' shouted a voice. This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his
face and looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe
and exclaimed,
"'Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never—'
"'Is that your knife?' And it was thrust before him by the sheriff. Potter would have
fallen if they had caught him, and eased him to the ground. Then he said,
"'Something's told me to—if I didn't come back and get—' he shuddered, and then
waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture, and said,
"'Tell him, Joe, tell him! It ain't any use any more!'
Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the stony-hearted liar reel off
his serene statement, they expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver God's
lightnings upon his head, and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when
he had finished, and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their
oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished away, for plainly
this miscreant had sold himself to Satan, and it would be fatal to meddle with the property
of such a power as that.
"'Why didn't you leave? What did you want to come here for?' somebody said.
"'I couldn't help it, I couldn't help it!' Potter moaned.
"'I wanted to run away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here.' And he fell to
sobbing again.
Injun Joe repeated his statement just as calmly a few minutes afterwards on the inquest, under
oath, and the boys, seeing that the lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their
belief that Joe had sold himself to the devil. He was now become to them the most balefully
interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinated eyes
from his face. They inwardly resolved to watch him, nights, when opportunity should offer,
in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master. Injun Joe helped to raise the body
of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal, and it was whispered through
the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little. The boys thought that this happy
circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction, but they were disappointed, for
more than one villager remarked,
"'It was within three feet of Muff Potter when he'd done it!'
Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much as a week
after this, and at breakfast one morning Sid said,
"'Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me awake half the time!'
Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.
"'It's a bad sign,' said Aunt Polly gravely. "'What you got on your mind, Tom?'
"'Nothing. Nothing to know of.'
But the boy's hand shook so that he spilled his coffee.
"'And you do talk such stuff,' said Sid. "'Last night you said, It's blood, It's blood,
that's what it is. You said that over and over, and you said, Don't torment me so. I'll
tell.'
"'Tell what? What is it you'll tell?'
Everything was swimming before, Tom. There's no telling what might have happened now, but
luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face, and she came to Tom's relief without
knowing it. She said,
"'Sure. It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night myself. Sometimes
I dream it's me that done it.'
Mary said she had been affected much the same way. Sid seemed satisfied. Tom got out of
the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that he complained of a toothache
for a week, and tied up his jaws every night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching,
and frequently slipped the bandage free, and then leaned on his elbow, listening a good
while at a time, and afterwards slipped the bandage back to its place again. Tom's distress
of mind wore off gradually, and the toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid really
managed to make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself. It seemed
to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus
keeping his trouble present to his mind. Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one
of these inquiries, though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises.
He noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness, and that was strange, and Sid did
not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a marked aversion to these inquests, and always
avoided them when he could.
Sid marveled, but said nothing. However, even inquests went out of vogue at last, and ceased
to torture Tom's conscience. Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched
his opportunity, and went to the little grated jail window, and smuggled such small comforts
through to the murderer, as he could get hold of. The jail was a trifling little brick den
that stood in a marsh at the edge of the village, and no guards were afforded for it, indeed
it was seldom occupied. These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's conscience. The villagers
had a strong desire to tar and feather Injun Joe and ride him on a rail for body-snatching,
but so formidable was his character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the
lead in the matter, so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both of his inquest
the fight, without confessing the grave robbery that preceded it. Therefore it was deemed
wisest not to try the case in the courts at present.
CHAPTER XII. THE CAT AND THE PAIN-KILLER.
One of the reasons why Tom's mind had drifted away from its secret troubles was that it
had found a new and weighty matter to interest itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming
to school. Tom had struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to whistle her down
the wind, but failed. He began to find himself hanging around her father's house nights,
and feeling very miserable.
She was ill. What if she should die? There was distraction in the thought. He no longer
took an interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was gone. There was nothing
but dreariness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat. There was no joy in them anymore.
His aunt was concerned. She began to try all manner of remedies on him. She was one of
those people who are infatuated with patent medicines, and all newfangled methods of producing
health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in these things. When something
fresh in this line came out, she was in a fever, right away, to try it. Not on herself,
for she was never ailing, but on anybody else that came handy. She was a subscriber for
all the health periodicals and phenomenological frauds, and the solemn ignorance they were
inflated with was breath to her nostrils. All the rot they contained about ventilation
and how to go to bed, and how to get up, and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much
to take, and what frame of mind to keep oneself in, and what sort of clothing to wear, was
all gospel to her, and she never observed that her health journals of the current month
customarily upset everything they had recommended the month before. She was as simple-hearted
and honest as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim. She gathered together
her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed with death went about on her
pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with the hell following after. But she never suspected
that she was not an angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise to the suffering
neighbors. The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall to
her. She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the woodshed, and drowned
him with a deluge of cold water. Then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file,
and so brought him to. Then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets
till she sweated his soul clean, and the yellow stains of it came through his pores, as Tom
said.
Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale and dejected.
She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and plunges. The boy remained as dismal as
She calculated his capacity as she would a jugs, and filled him up every day with quack
cure-alls. Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time. This phase filled the old lady's
heart with consternation. This indifference must be broken up at any cost. Now she heard
of painkiller for the first time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it and was filled
with gratitude. It was simply fire in a liquid form. She dropped the water treatment and
everything else, and pinned her faith to painkiller. She gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with
the deepest anxiety for the result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace
again. For the indifference was broken up. The boy could not have shown a wilder, heartier
if she had built a fire under him. Tom felt that it was time to wake up. This sort of
life might be romantic enough in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have too
little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it. So he thought over various
plans for relief, and finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of painkiller. He
asked for it so often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help
himself and quit bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no misgivings
to alloy her delight, but since it was Tom she watched the bottle clandestinely. She
found that the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur to her that the boy was
mending the health of a crack in the sitting-room floor with it.
One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow cat came along purring,
eyeing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste. Tom said,
"'Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter.' But Peter signified that he did want it.
"'You'd better make sure.' Peter was sure. "'Now you've asked for it, and I'll give
it to you, because there ain't anything mean about me. But if you find you don't like it,
you mustn't blame anybody but your own self.'
Peter was agreeable, so Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the painkiller. Peter
sprang a couple of yards in the air and then delivered a war-whoop and set off round and
round the room, banging against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general
havoc. Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around in a frenzy of enjoyment, with his
head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing
around the house again, spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered
in time to see him throw a few double summer sets, deliver a final mighty hurrah, and sail
through the open window, carrying the rest of the flower-pots with him. The old lady
stood petrified with astonishment, peering over her glasses. Tom lay on the floor, expiring
with laughter.
"'Tom, what on earth ails that cat?'
"'I don't know, aunt,' gasped the boy.
"'Why, I never see anything like it. What did make him act so?'
"'Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly. Cats always act so when they're having a good time.'
"'They do, do they?' There was something in the tone that made Tom apprehensive.
"'Yesem! That is, I believe they do.'
"'You do? Yesem!'
The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized by anxiety. Too late
he divined her drift. The handle of the tell-tale teaspoon was visible under the bed valance.
Aunt Polly took it, held it up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him
by the usual handle—his ear—and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.
"'Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so for?'
"'I done it out of pity for him, because he hadn't any aunt.'
"'Hadn't any aunt, you numbskull! What has that got to do with it?'
"'Heaps! Because if he'd a had one, she'd a burnt him out herself. She'd a roasted
his bowels out of him, without any more feeling than if he was a human.'
Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing in a new light.
What was cruelty to a cat might be cruelty to a boy, too.' She began to soften. She felt
sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently,
"'I was meaning for the best, Tom, and Tom, it did do you good.' Tom looked up in her
face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping through his gravity.
"'I know you was meaning for the best, auntie, and so was I with Peter. It done him good,
too. I never seen him get around so since. Oh, go along with you, Tom, before you aggravate
me again, and you try and see if you can't be a good boy for once, and you needn't take
any more medicine.'
Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange thing had been occurring
every day laterly. And now, as usual of late, he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead
of playing with his comrades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it. He tried to seem
to be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking—down the road. Presently Jeff
Thatcherhoff in sight, and Tom's face lighted. He gazed a moment and then turned sorrowfully
away. When Jeff arrived Tom accosted him and led up, warily, to opportunities for remark
about Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and watched, hoping
whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she
was not the right one. At last frocks ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into
their dumps. He entered the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer.
Then one more frock passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next
instant he was out, and going on like an Indian, yelling and laughing and chasing boys, jumping
over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing hand-springs, standing on his head, doing
the heroic things he could conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out all the while to
see if Becky Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be unconscious of it all. She never
looked. Could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there? He carried his
exploits to her immediate vicinity, came war-whooping around, snatched a body's cap, hurled it to
the roof of the schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every direction,
and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost upsetting her, and she turned,
with her nose in the air, and he heard her say,
"'Humph! Some people think their mighty smart-hall was showing off!'
Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed and crestfallen.